=== PDF PAGE 1 ===
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL ELECTRONICS, VOL. 58, NO. 4, APRIL 2011 1259
Synchronverters: Inverters That Mimic
Synchronous Generators
Qing-Chang Zhong, Senior Member , IEEE, and George Weiss
Abstract—In this paper, the idea of operating an inverter
to mimic a synchronous generator (SG) is motivated and
developed. We call the inverters that are operated in this
way synchronverters. Using synchronverters, the well-established
theory/algorithms used to control SGs can still be used in power
systems where a signiﬁcant proportion of the generating capac-
ity is inverter-based. We describe the dynamics, implementation,
and operation of synchronverters. The real and reactive power
delivered by synchronverters connected in parallel and operated
as generators can be automatically shared using the well-known
frequency- and voltage-drooping mechanisms. Synchronverters
can be easily operated also in island mode, and hence, they provide
an ideal solution for microgrids or smart grids. Both simulation
and experimental results are given to verify the idea.
Index Terms —Distributed generation, frequency drooping,
inverter-dominated power system, load sharing, microgrid, par-
allel inverters, pulsewidth modulation (PWM) inverter, renewable
energy, smart grid, static synchronous generator (SG), synchron-
verter, virtual SG, voltage drooping.
I. I NTRODUCTION
F
OR ECONOMIC, technical, and environmental reasons,
the share of electrical energy produced by distributed
energy sources, such as combined heat and power (CHP)
plants, and renewable-energy sources, such as wind power,
solar power, wave and tidal power, etc., is steadily increas-
ing. The European Union has set a 22% target for the
share of renewable-energy sources and an 18% target for
the share of CHP in electricity generation by 2010. The
electrical power system is currently undergoing a dramatic
change from centralized generation to distributed generation.
Most of these distributed/renewable-energy generators com-
prise variable-frequency ac sources, high-frequency ac sources,
or dc sources, and hence, they need dc–ac converters, also
Manuscript received October 20, 2009; accepted January 19, 2010. Date
of publication April 29, 2010; date of current version March 11, 2011. This
paper was presented in part at the 2009 IEEE Power Engineering Society Power
Systems Conference & Exhibition Seattle, W A, USA, March 2009. The work
of Q.-C Zhong was supported in part by the Royal Academy of Engineering,
by the Leverhulme Trust, with the award of a Senior Research Fellowship
(2009-2010), and by the EPSRC, U.K., with the support of the Network
for New Academics in Control Engineering (New Ace, www.newace.org.uk)
Grant EP/E055877/1 and the support under the DTA scheme.
Q.-C. Zhong was with the Department of Electrical Engineering and Elec-
tronics, University of Liverpool, L69 3GJ Liverpool, U.K. He is now with
the Department of Aeronautical and Automotive Engineering, Loughborough
University, Leicestershire LE11 3TU, U.K.
G. Weiss is with the Department of Electrical Engineering Systems,
Faculty of Engineering, Tel Aviv University, Ramat Aviv 69978, Israel (e-mail:
gweiss@eng.tau.ac.il).
Color versions of one or more of the ﬁgures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/TIE.2010.2048839
called inverters, to interface with the public-utility grid. For
example, wind turbines are most effective if free to generate
at variable frequency, and so, they require conversion from
variable frequency ac to dc to ac; small gas-turbines with direct-
drive generators operate at high frequency and also require
ac to dc to ac conversion; photovoltaic arrays require dc–ac
conversion. This means that more and more inverters will be
connected to the grid and will eventually dominate power
generation.
The current paradigm in the control of wind- or solar-power
generators is to extract the maximum power from the power
source and inject them all into the power grid (see, for example,
[1]–[3]). Advanced algorithms have been developed to ensure
that the current injected into the grid is clean sinusoidal (see,
for example, [4]). The policy of injecting all available power
to the grid is a good one as long as renewable power sources
constitute a small part of the grid power capacity. Indeed, any
random power ﬂuctuation of the renewable power generators
will be compensated by the controllers associated with the large
conventional generators, and some of these generators will also
take care of the overall power balance, system stability, and
fault ride through.
When renewable power generators (particularly the solar
ones) will provide the majority of the grid power, such “ir-
responsible” behavior (on their part) will become untenable.
Thus, the need will arise to operate them in the same way
as conventional power generators or at least to imitate certain
aspects of the operation of conventional generators using novel
techniques (see [5]–[11]). This will require high-efﬁciency
energy-storage units so that the random ﬂuctuations of the
prime power source can be ﬁltered out. The key problem here
is how to control the inverters in distributed power generators.
There are two options: The ﬁrst is to redesign the whole power
system and to change the way it is operated (e.g., establish fast
communication lines between generators and possibly central
control) and the second is to ﬁnd a way so that these inverters
can be integrated into the existing system and behave in the
same way as large synchronous generators (SG) do. We think
that the second option has the advantages, as it would assure a
smooth transition to a grid dominated by inverters.
In this paper, we propose a method by which an inverter
can be operated to mimic the behavior of an SG. The dynamic
equations are the same; only the mechanical power exchanged
with the prime mover (or with the mechanical load, as the
case may be) is replaced with the power exchanged with the
dc bus. We call such an inverter (including the ﬁlter inductors
and capacitors) and the associated controller a synchronverter.
To be more precise, a synchronverter is equivalent to an SG
with a small capacitor bank connected in parallel to the stator
0278-0046/$26.00 © 2010 IEEE

=== PDF PAGE 2 ===
1260 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL ELECTRONICS, VOL. 58, NO. 4, APRIL 2011
terminals. A sychronverter will have all the good and bad
properties of an SG, which is a complex nonlinear system. For
example, the undesirable phenomena, such as loss of stability
due to underexcitation as well as hunting (oscillations around
the synchronous frequency), could occur in a synchronverter.
An advantage is that we can choose the parameters, such
as inertia, friction coefﬁcient, ﬁeld inductance, and mutual
inductances. (The energy that would be lost in the virtual
mechanical friction is not lost in reality; it is directed back
to the dc bus.) Moreover, we can (and do) choose to have
no magnetic saturation and no eddy currents. If we want,
we can choose parameter values that are impossible in a real
SG, and we can also vary the parameters while the system is
operating.
If a synchronverter is connected to the utility grid and is
operated as a generator, no difference would be felt from the
grid side between this system and an SG. Thus, the conventional
control algorithms and equipment that have been developed for
SGs driven by prime movers (and which have reached a high
level of maturity over 100 years) can be applied to synchron-
verters. Synchronverters can also be operated as synchronous
motors based on the same mathematical derivation. One option
is to decide the direction of the energy ﬂow between the dc
bus and the ac bus in a synchronverter automatically according
to the grid frequency. We think that synchronverters operated as
synchronous motors will be useful, for example, in high-voltage
dc transmission lines, where dc power would be sent from a
synchronverter working as a motor to another one working as a
generator at the other end of the line.
We mention that IEEE deﬁned a term, called static SG [12],
to designate a static self-commutated switching power con-
verter supplied from an appropriate electric energy source
and operated to produce a set of adjustable multiphase output
voltages, which may be coupled to an ac power system for
the purpose of exchanging independently controllable real and
reactive power. This term was originally deﬁned for one of the
shunt-connected controllers in ﬂexible ac transmission system.
Clearly, synchronverters operated as generators would be a
particular type of static SGs.
There are papers in the literature exploring related ideas.
The concept of a virtual synchronous machine (VISMA) was
proposed in [13], where the voltages at the point of common
coupling with the grid are measured to calculate the phase
currents of the VISMA in real time. These currents are then
used as reference currents for the inverter, and hence, the
inverter behaves as a current source connected to the grid. If
the current tracking error is small, then the inverter behaves
like a synchronous machine, justifying the term VISMA. If
the current tracking error is large, then the inverter behavior
changes. They provided extensive experimental results (but the
grid integration of VISMA using control algorithms for SG was
left as future work). As a key difference to the synchronverter,
it is worth mentioning that the synchronverter does not depend
on the tracking of reference currents or voltages. In [15] and
[16], a short-term energy-storage system is added to the inverter
in order to provide virtual inertia to the system. The power
ﬂow to the storage is proportional to the derivative of the grid
frequency (as it would be with real inertia). This kind of inverter
with added virtual inertia, called virtual SGs, can contribute to
the short-term stabilization of the grid frequency. However, the
system dynamics seen from the grid side will be different from
those of an SG.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section II,
a dynamic model of SGs is established under no assumptions
on the signals. Although the model of an SG is well docu-
mented in the literature, the way the model is described here
is somewhat fresh. The way to implement a synchronverter is
described in Section III, and issues related to its operation, e.g.,
frequency- and voltage-drooping mechanisms for load sharing,
are described in Section IV. Simulation results are given in
Section V, and experimental results are given in Section VI with
conclusions in Section VII. A patent application has been ﬁled
for the technology described here.
II. M
ODELING SYNCHRONOUS MACHINES
The model of synchronous machines can be found in many
sources such as [17]–[21]. Most of the references make various
assumptions, such as steady state and/or balanced sinusoidal
voltages/currents, to simplify the analysis. Here, we brieﬂy
outline a model that is a (nonlinear) passive dynamic system
without any assumptions on the signals, from the perspective
of system analysis and controller design. We consider a round
rotor machine so that all stator inductances are constant. Our
model assumes that there are no damper windings in the rotor,
that there is one pair of poles per phase (and one pair of poles
on the rotor), and that there are no magnetic-saturation effects
in the iron core and no eddy currents. As is well known, the
damper windings help to suppress hunting and also help to
bring the machine into synchronism with the grid (see, for
example, [21]). We leave it for later research to establish if it
is worthwhile to include damper windings in the model used to
implement a synchronverter. Our simulation and experimental
results do not seem to point at such a need-we got negligible
hunting, and we got fast synchronization algorithms without
using damper windings.
A. Electrical Part
For details on the geometry of the windings, we refer to
[18] and [19]. The ﬁeld and the three identical stator windings
are distributed in slots around the periphery of the uniform air
gap. The stator windings can be regarded as concentrated coils
having self-inductance L and mutual inductance − M (M> 0
with a typical value 1/2L, the negative sign is due to the 2π/3
phase angle), as shown in Fig. 1. The ﬁeld (or rotor) winding
can be regarded as a concentrated coil having self-inductance
L
f . The mutual inductance between the ﬁeld coil and each of
the three stator coils varies with the rotor angle θ, i.e.,
Maf =Mf cos(θ)
Mbf =Mf cos
(
θ− 2π
3
)
Mcf =Mf cos
(
θ− 4π
3
)

=== PDF PAGE 3 ===
ZHONG AND WEISS: SYNCHRONVERTERS: INVERTERS THAT MIMIC SYNCHRONOUS GENERATORS 1261
Fig. 1. Structure of an idealized three-phase round-rotor SG, modiﬁed from
[17, Fig. 3.4].
where Mf > 0. The ﬂux linkages of the windings are
Φa =Lia − Mib − Mic + Maf if
Φb = − Mia + Lib − Mic + Mbf if
Φc = − Mia − Mib + Lic + Mcf if
Φf =Maf ia + Mbf ib + Mcf ic + Lf if
where ia,i b, and ic are the stator phase currents and if is the
rotor excitation current. Denote
Φ=
⎡
⎣
Φa
Φb
Φc
⎤
⎦ i =
⎡
⎣
ia
ib
ic
⎤
⎦
˜cos θ=
⎡
⎣
cos θ
cos
(
θ− 2π
3
)
cos
(
θ− 4π
3
)
⎤
⎦ ˜sin θ=
⎡
⎣
sin θ
sin
(
θ− 2π
3
)
sin
(
θ− 4π
3
)
⎤
⎦.
Assume for the moment that the neutral line is not con-
nected, then
ia + ib + ic =0 .
It follows that the stator ﬂux linkages can be rewritten as
Φ= Lsi + Mf if ˜cos θ (1)
where Ls = L + M, and the ﬁeld ﬂux linkage can be re-
written as
Φf = Lf if + Mf ⟨i, ˜cos θ⟩ (2)
where ⟨·, ·⟩ denotes the conventional inner product in R3.
We remark that the second term Mf ⟨i, ˜cosθ⟩ (called arma-
ture reaction) is constant if the three phase currents are sinu-
soidal (as functions of θ) and balanced. We also mention that√
2/3⟨i, ˜cosθ⟩ is called the d-axis component of the current.
Assume that the resistance of the stator windings isRs; then,
the phase terminal voltagesv =[ va vb vc]T can be obtained
from (1) as
v = − Rsi − dΦ
dt = − Rsi − Ls
di
dt + e (3)
where e =[ ea eb ec]T is the back electromotive force
(EMF) due to the rotor movement given by
e = Mf if ˙θ˜sinθ− Mf
dif
dt ˜cos θ. (4)
The voltage vector e is also called no-load voltage or syn-
chronous internal voltage.
We mention that, from (2), the ﬁeld terminal voltage is
vf = − Rf if − dΦf
dt (5)
where Rf is the resistance of the rotor winding. However, we
shall not need the expression for vf because we shall use if
instead of vf as an adjustable constant input. This completes
the modeling of the electrical part of the machine.
B. Mechanical Part
The mechanical part of the machine is governed by
J ¨θ= Tm − Te − Dp ˙θ (6)
where J is the moment of inertia of all the parts rotating with
the rotor,Tm is the mechanical torque,Te is the electromagnetic
toque, and Dp is a damping factor. Te can be found from the
energy E stored in the machine magnetic ﬁeld, i.e.,
E = 1
2 ⟨i,Φ⟩ + 1
2if Φf = 1
2 ⟨i, Lsi + Mf if ˜cos θ⟩
+ 1
2if (Lf if + Mf ⟨i, ˜cosθ⟩)
= 1
2 ⟨i, Lsi⟩ + Mf if ⟨i, ˜cos θ⟩ + 1
2Lf i2
f .
From simple energy considerations (see, e.g., [18] and [22])
we have
Te = ∂E
∂θ
⏐⏐⏐
⏐
Φ,Φf constant
(because constant ﬂux linkages mean no back EMF, all the
power ﬂow is mechanical). It is not difﬁcult to verify (using the
formula for the derivative of the inverse of a matrix function)
that this is equivalent to
Te = − ∂E
∂θ
⏐⏐⏐⏐
i,if constant
.
Thus
Te = − Mf if
⟨
i, ∂
∂θ˜cos θ
⟩
= Mf if ⟨i, ˜sin θ⟩. (7)

=== PDF PAGE 4 ===
1262 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL ELECTRONICS, VOL. 58, NO. 4, APRIL 2011
We mention that−
√
2/3⟨i, ˜sinθ⟩ is called the q-axis compo-
nent of the current. Note that if i = i0 ˜sinϕ for some arbitrary
angle ϕ, then
Te = Mf if i0⟨ ˜sin ϕ, ˜sin θ⟩ = 3
2Mf if i0 cos(θ− ϕ).
Note also that if if is constant (as is usually the case), then
(7) with (4) yields
Te ˙θ= ⟨i, e⟩.
C. Provision of Neutral Line
The previous analysis is based on the assumption that the
neutral line is not connected. If the neutral line is connected,
then
ia + ib + ic = iN
where iN is the current ﬂowing through the neutral line. Then,
the formula for the stator ﬂux linkages (1) becomes
Φ= Lsi + Mf if ˜cos θ−
⎡
⎣
1
1
1
⎤
⎦Mi
N
and the phase terminal voltages (3) become
v = − Rsi − Ls
di
dt +
⎡
⎣
1
1
1
⎤
⎦M diN
dt + e
where e was given by (4). The other formulas are not affected.
As we have seen, the provision of a neutral line makes
the system model somewhat more complicated. However, in
a synchronverter to be designed in the next section, M is a
design parameter that can be chosen to be zero. The physical
meaning of this is that there is no magnetic coupling between
the stator windings. This does not happen in a physical SG but
can be easily implemented in a synchronverter. When we need
to provide a neutral line, it is an advantageous choice to take
M =0 as it simpliﬁes the equations. Otherwise, the choice of
M and L individually is irrelevant; what matters only is that
L
s = L + M. In the sequel, the model of an SG consisting of
(3), (4), (6), and (7) will be used to operate an inverter as a
synchronverter.
III. I MPLEMENTATION OF SYNCHRONVERTER
In this section, the details on how to implement a synchron-
verter will be described. A simple dc/ac converter (inverter)
used to convert dc power into three-phase ac (or the other way
round) is shown in Fig. 2. It includes three inverter legs operated
using pulsewidth modulation (PWM) and LC ﬁlters to reduce
the voltage ripple (and hence, the current ripple) caused by the
switching. In grid-connected operation, the impedance of the
grid should be included in the impedance of the inductors L
g
(with series resistance Rg), and then we may consider that after
the circuit breaker, we have an inﬁnite bus. The circuit shown
Fig. 2. Power part of a synchronverter—a three phase inverter, including LC
ﬁlters.
Fig. 3. Electronic part of a synchronverter (without control). This part inter-
acts with the power part via e and i.
in Fig. 2 does not provide a neutral line, but this can be added
if needed. The power part of the synchronverter is the circuit to
the left of the three capacitors, together with the capacitors. If
we disregard the ripple, then this part of the circuit will behave
like an SG connected in parallel with the same capacitors. The
inductors, denoted as L
g, are not part of the synchronverter,
but it is useful to have them (for synchronization and power
control). It is important to have some energy storage (not
shown) on the dc bus (at the left end of the ﬁgure) since the
power absorbed from the dc bus represents not only the power
taken from the imaginary prime mover but also from the inertia
of the rotating part of the imaginary SG. This latter component
of the power may come in strong bursts, which is proportional
to the derivative of the grid frequency.
What we call the electronic part of the synchronverter is
a digital signal processor (DSP) and its associated circuits,
running under a special program, which controls the switches
shown in Fig. 2. Its block diagram is shown in Fig. 3. These
two parts interact via the signals e and i (v and v
g will be
used for controlling the synchronverter). The various voltage
and current sensors and the signal conditioning circuits and
analog/digital converters should be regarded as part of the
electronic part of the synchronverter. Normally, the program on
the DSP will contain also parts that represent the controller of
the synchronverter (not the synchronverter itself).
A. Power Part
We give some ideas for the design of the power part. It
is important to understand that the terminal voltages v =
[v
a vb vc]T of the imaginary SG, as given in (3), are rep-
resented by the capacitor voltages shown in Fig. 2. Further,

=== PDF PAGE 5 ===
ZHONG AND WEISS: SYNCHRONVERTERS: INVERTERS THAT MIMIC SYNCHRONOUS GENERATORS 1263
the impedance of the stator windings of the imaginary SG is
represented by the inductance Ls and the resistance Rs of the
left inductors shown in Fig. 2. It follows from here that ea, eb,
and ec should represent the back EMF due to the movement of
the imaginary rotor. This is not possible exactly becauseea, eb,
and ec are high-frequency switching signals, but it is possible
in the average sense: The switches in the inverter should be
operated so that the average values of ea, eb, and ec over a
switching period should be equal to e given in (4). This can
be achieved by the usual PWM technique.
It is advantageous to assume that the imaginary ﬁeld (rotor)
winding of the synchronverter is fed by an adjustable dc current
source if instead of a voltage source vf . Then, the terminal
voltage vf varies, but this is irrelevant. As long asif is constant,
the generated voltage from (4) reduces to
e = ˙θMf if ˜sin θ. (8)
The ﬁltering capacitors C should be chosen such that the
resonant frequency 1/√ LsC is approximately √ ωnωs, where
ωn is the nominal angular frequency of the grid voltage and
ωs is the angular switching frequency used to turn on/off the
switches (insulated-gate bipolar transistors (IGBTs) are shown
in the ﬁgure but other power semiconductors can be used
as well).
If a neutral line is needed, then the strategies proposed in [23]
or [24] to provide a neutral line without affecting the control of
the three-phase inverter may be used.
B. Electronic Part
Deﬁne the generated real power P and reactive power Q
(as seen from the inverter legs) as
P = ⟨i, e⟩ Q = ⟨i, e
q ⟩
where eq has the same amplitude as e but with a phase delayed
from that of e by π/2, i.e.,
eq = ˙θMf if ˜sin
(
θ− π
2
)
= − ˙θMf if ˜cos θ.
Then, the real power and reactive power are, respectively
P = ˙θMf if ⟨i, ˜sin θ⟩
Q = − ˙θMf if ⟨i, ˜cos θ⟩. (9)
These coincide with the conventional deﬁnitions for real
power and reactive power, usually expressed ind, qcoordinates.
Positive Q corresponds to an inductive load. Note that, if
i = i0 ˜sinϕ for some angle ϕ (this would be the case, e.g., in
balanced steady-state operation with θ− ϕ constant), then
P = ˙θMf if ⟨i, ˜sin θ⟩ = 3
2
˙θMf if i0 cos(θ− ϕ)
Q = − ˙θMf if ⟨i, ˜cos θ⟩ = 3
2
˙θMf if i0 sin(θ− ϕ).
The previous formulas forP and Q are used when regulating
the real and reactive power of an SG.
Equation (6) can be written as
¨θ= 1
J (Tm − Te − Dp ˙θ)
where the mechanical (or active) torque Tm is a control input,
while the electromagnetic torqueTe depends on i and θaccord-
ing to (7). This equation, together with (7)–(9), is implemented
in the electronic part of a synchronverter shown in Fig. 3. Thus,
the state variables of the synchronverter are i (the inductor
currents), v (the capacitor voltages), θ, and ˙θ (which are a
virtual angle and a virtual angular speed). (In the absence of
a neutral line, only two of the three currents in the vector i are
independent.) The control inputs of the synchronverter are T
m
and Mf if . In order to operate the synchronverter in a useful
way, we need a controller that generates the signals Tm and
Mf if such that system stability is maintained, and the desired
values of real and reactive power are followed. The signiﬁcance
of Q will be discussed in the next section.
IV . O
PERATION OF SYNCHRONVERTER
A. Frequency Drooping and Regulation of Real Power
For SGs, the rotor speed is maintained by the prime mover,
and it is known that the damping factorDp is due to mechanical
friction. An important mechanism for SGs to share load evenly
(in proportion to their nominal load) is to vary the real power
delivered to the grid according to the grid frequency, which is
a control loop called “frequency droop.” When the real-power
demand increases, the speed of the SGs drops due to increased
T
e in (6). The power regulation system of the prime mover then
increases the mechanical power, e.g., by widening the throttle
valve of an engine, so that a new power balance is achieved.
Typical values for the frequency droop are a 100% increase
in power for a frequency decrease between 3% and 5% (from
nominal values).
The frequency-droop mechanism can be implemented in a
synchronverter by comparing the virtual angular speed ˙θ with
the angular frequency reference ˙θ
r (which normally would be
equal to the nominal angular frequency of the grid ˙θn) and
adding this difference, multiplied with a gain, to the active
torque Tm. The formulas show that the effect of the frequency-
droop control loop is equivalent to a signiﬁcant increase of
the mechanical friction coefﬁcient Dp. In Fig. 4 and later,
the constant Dp represents the (imaginary) mechanical-friction
coefﬁcient plus the frequency-drooping coefﬁcient (the latter
is far larger). Thus, denoting the change in the total torque
acting on the imaginary rotor by Δ T and the change in angular
frequency by Δ ˙θ,w eh a v e
D
p = − Δ T
Δ ˙θ
.
It is worth noting that, in some references, such as [5], Dp
is deﬁned as − Δ ˙θ/Δ T . Here, the negative sign is to make Dp
positive. The active torqueTm can be obtained from the setpoint
(or reference value) of the real power Pset by dividing it with
the nominal mechanical speed ˙θn, as shown in Fig. 4. (Actually
it should be ˙θinstead of ˙θn, but the relative difference between

=== PDF PAGE 6 ===
1264 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL ELECTRONICS, VOL. 58, NO. 4, APRIL 2011
Fig. 4. Regulation of the real and reactive power in a synchronverter.
θn and θ is negligible.) This completes the feedback loop for
real power, as seen in the upper part of Fig. 4. Because of
the built-in frequency-drooping mechanism, a synchronverter
automatically shares the load variations with other inverters of
the same type and with SGs on the same power grid. The real
power regulation loop is very simple because no mechanical
devices are involved, and no measurements other than i are
needed (all the variables are available in the DSP).
The regulation mechanism of the real power (torque) shown
in the upper part of Fig. 4 has a nested structure, where the inner
loop is the frequency-droop loop (with feedback gain D
p) and
the outer loop is the more complex real power loop (with the
feedback coming from the currenti via the torqueTe). The time
constant of the frequency-droop loop is τf = J/Dp. Hence, if
we have decided upon τf , then J should be chosen as
J = Dpτf .
Because there is no delay involved in the frequency-droop
loop, the time constant τf can be made much smaller than for a
real SG. It is not necessary to have a large inertia as with a phys-
ical SG, where a larger inertia means that more energy is stored
mechanically. Whether a small inertia is good for overall grid
stability is an open question for later research. At any rate, the
energy-storage function of a synchronverter can, and should,
be decoupled from the inertia (unlike the approach proposed
in [15]). The short-term energy-storage function (inertia) can
be implemented with a synchronverter using the same storage
system (e.g., batteries) that is used for long-term storage.
B. V oltage Drooping and Regulation of Reactive Power
The regulation of reactive power Q ﬂowing out of the
synchronverter can be realized similarly. Deﬁne the voltage-
drooping coefﬁcient D
q as the ratio of the required change of
reactive power Δ Q to the change of voltage Δ v, i.e.,
Dq = − Δ Q
Δ v .
We note that in some references (e.g., [5]), Dq is deﬁned
as − Δ v/Δ Q. The control loop for the reactive power can be
realized as shown in the lower part of Fig. 4. The difference
between the reference voltage vr and the amplitude vm of
the feedback voltage vfb (normally vfb would be vg from
Fig. 2 if it is available, otherwise, something close to it) is
the voltage amplitude tracking error. This error is multiplied
with the voltage-drooping coefﬁcient D
q and then added to the
tracking error between the reference valueQset and the reactive
power Q, which is calculated according to (9). The resulting
signal is then fed into an integrator with a gain1/K to generate
Mf if . It is important to note that there is no need to measure
the reactive power Q, as it can be computed from i (which is
measured) and from θ and ˙θ, which are available internally in
the DSP.
The control of the reactive power shown in the lower part
of Fig. 4 also has a nested structure, if the effect of the LC
ﬁlter is ignored (which means considering vfb ≈ e so that
vm ≈ ˙θMf if ). The inner loop is the (amplitude) voltage loop,
and the outer loop is the reactive-power loop. The time constant
τ
v of the voltage loop can be estimated as
τv ≈ K
˙θDq
≈ K
˙θnDq
as the variation of ˙θis very small. Hence, K follows if τv and
Dq have been chosen.
The amplitude detector in Fig. 4 can be realized in several
ways. One is by using a phase-locked loop (PLL); we do not
go into the details of this. Another elementary method is as
follows: Assume that vfba = vm sin θa, vfbb = vm sinθb, and
vfbc = vm sin θc, then
vavb + vbvc + vcva
= v2
m[sinθa sin θb +s i nθb sin θc +s i nθc sin θa]
= v2
m
2 [cos(θa − θb)+c o s (θb − θc)+c o s (θc − θa)]
− v2
m
2 [cos(θa + θb)+c o s (θb + θc)+c o s (θc + θa)].
When the terminal voltages are balanced, i.e., when θb =
θa − 2π/3= θc +2 π/3, then the last term of the aforemen-
tioned is zero, and we obtain
vavb + vbvc + vcva = − 3
4v2
m.
The amplitude vm can be computed from here with ease. In
a real implementation, a low-pass ﬁlter is needed to attenuate
the ripples in vm (at twice the grid frequency) as the terminal
voltages may be unbalanced. This observation applies also to
Te and Q.
V. S IMULATION RESULTS
The ideas described earlier have been veriﬁed with simula-
tions. The parameters of the inverter used in the simulations are
given in Table I.
In our simulations, the inverter is considered to be connected
to the grid via a step-up transformer so that we work with rela-
tively low voltages. The reason for this is to make the simulation

=== PDF PAGE 7 ===
ZHONG AND WEISS: SYNCHRONVERTERS: INVERTERS THAT MIMIC SYNCHRONOUS GENERATORS 1265
TABLE I
PARAMETERS OF SYNCHRONVERTER
results comparable with the experimental results to be given in
the next section. However, the proposed control strategy should
work for high voltage and high power as well. We have chosen
Dp =0 .2026, which means that a frequency drop of 0.5%
causes the torque (hence, the power) to increase by 100% (from
nominal power). The voltage-drooping coefﬁcient is chosen as
D
q = 117.88. The time constants of the droop loops are chosen
as τf =0 .002 s and τv =0 .002 s. The simulations were carried
out in M ATLAB 7.4 with Simulink. The solver used in the
simulations was ode23tb with a relative tolerance of 10 −3 and
am a x i m u ms t e ps i z eo f0 . 2m s .
The simulation was started at t =0 . A PLL was used for the
initial synchronization, which will not be discussed in this paper
because of page limit. For this reason, the ﬁrst half-second is
omitted from our plots. The initial settings for Pset and Qset
were zero. The circuit breaker was turned on att =1 s; the real
power Pset =8 0 W was applied at t =2 s, and the reactive
power Qset =6 0V a rwas applied at t =3 s. The drooping
feedbacks were enabled at t =4 s, and then the grid voltage
was decreased by 5% at t =5 s.
A. With Nominal Grid Frequency
The system responses are shown in Fig. 5(a). The frequency
tracked the grid frequency very well all the time. The voltage
difference between v and vg before any power demand was
applied was very small, and the synchronization was very
quick. There was no problem turning the circuit breaker on
at t =1 s; there was not much transient response caused by
this event. The synchronverter responded quickly both to the
step change in real-power demand at t =2 s and to the step
change in reactive power demand att =3 s, and it settled down
in less than ten cycles without any error. The coupling effect
between the real power and the reactive power is reasonably
small, and the decoupling control of the real power and reactive
power is left for future research. When the drooping mechanism
was enabled at t =4 s, there was not much change to the real-
power output as the frequency was not changed, but the reactive
power dropped by about 53Var, about 50% of the power rating,
because the local terminal voltagev was about 2.5% higher than
the nominal value. When the grid voltage dropped by 5% at
t =4 s, the local terminal voltage dropped to just below the
nominal value. The reactive-power output then increased to just
above the setpoint of 60 Var.
B. With Lower Grid Frequency
The simulation was repeated but with a grid frequency of
49.95 Hz, i.e., 0.1% lower than the nominal one. The system
Fig. 5. Simulation results. (a) With the nominal grid frequency. (b) With a
lower grid frequency.
responses are shown in Fig. 5(b). The synchronverter followed
the grid frequency very well. When the synchronverter worked
at the set mode, i.e., before t =4 s, the real and reactive
power tracked their setpoints with negligible error. After the
drooping mechanism was enabled att =4 s, the synchronverter
increased the real power output by 20 W, i.e., 20% of the power
rating, corresponding to the 0.1% drop of the frequency. This
did not cause much change to the reactive-power output, just a
slight adjustment corresponding to the slight change of the local
voltage v. The responses in the previous subsection are given in
the ﬁgure (dashed lines) for comparison.
VI. E
XPERIMENTAL RESULTS
The theory and simulations developed previously were veri-
ﬁed on an experimental synchronverter. For safety reasons, this
is a low-voltage low-power synchronverter, but it is enough
to demonstrate the technology. The parameters of the exper-
imental synchronverter are roughly the same as those given
in Table I, and the control parameters are the same. The
synchronverter was connected to a three-phase 400-V 50-Hz
grid via a circuit breaker and a step-up transformer. The sam-
pling frequency of the controller is 5 kHz, and the switching
frequency is 15 kHz. Many experiments were done, but only
two typical cases are shown here. The experiments were carried
out according to the following sequence of actions:
1) starting the system but keeping all the IGBTs off; using
the synchronization algorithm, which is not discussed
here;

=== PDF PAGE 8 ===
1266 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL ELECTRONICS, VOL. 58, NO. 4, APRIL 2011
Fig. 6. Experimental results when the grid frequency was < 50 Hz.
(a) Synchronverter frequency. (b) V oltage difference. (c) Amplitude of v and
vg.( d )P and Q.
2) starting operation of the IGBTs, roughly at t =2 s;
Pset = Qset =0 ;
3) turning the circuit breaker on, roughly at t =6 s;
4) applying Pset =7 0 W, roughly at t =1 1 s;
5) applying Qset =3 0V a r, roughly at t =1 6 s;
6) enabling the drooping mechanism, roughly at t =2 2 s;
7) stopping the data recording, roughly at t =2 7 s.
A. Case 1: Grid Frequency Was Lower Than 50 Hz
During this experiment, the grid frequency was lower than
50 Hz, increasing from 49.96 to 49.99 Hz. The synchronverter
frequency followed the grid frequency very well, with notice-
able transients after each action, as shown in Fig. 6(a). The
local terminal voltage synchronized with the grid voltage very
quickly once the inverter output was enabled, roughly att =2 s,
as shown in Fig. 6(b) and (c). The connection to the grid went
very smoothly, and there were no noticeable transients in the
frequency or power (see Fig. 6). The power remained around
zero but with bigger spikes. After the real-power demand was
raised, it took less than ten cycles to reach the setpoint, which
is very fast, and the overshoot was very small [see Fig. 6(d)].
This action caused the frequency to respond with a big spike;
the synchronverter initially “stored” some reactive power but
then released it very quickly. After the reactive-power demand
was raised, it took less than ten cycles to reach the setpoint
with a small overshoot [see Fig. 6(d)]. The frequency dropped
slightly, and the real power increased a bit, but all returned
to normal very quickly. Because the drooping mechanism was
not enabled, the real power and reactive power delivered by
the synchronverter followed the reference values. After the
drooping mechanism was enabled, roughly at t =2 2 s, the
synchronverter started to respond to the deviations of the grid
frequency and the voltage from their nominal values. The real
power delivered was increased as the grid frequency was lower
than the nominal value, while the reactive power was decreased
as the local terminal voltage was higher than the nominal
value.
Fig. 7. Experimental results when the grid frequency was > 50 Hz.
(a) Synchronverter frequency. (b) V oltage difference. (c) Amplitudes of v and
vg.( d )P and Q.
B. Case 2: Grid Frequency Was Higher Than 50 Hz
During this experiment, the grid frequency was higher than
50 Hz, increasing from 50.11 to 50.15 Hz. There was not much
difference from the previous experiment before the drooping
mechanism was enabled, except for a slight transient after the
connection to the grid, and the synchronverter responded well
to the instructions (see Fig. 7). After the drooping mechanism
was enabled, roughly at t =2 1 s, the synchronverter started to
respond to the highly deviated grid frequency (0.3%), which
meant that the grid had excessive real power and dropped the
real-power output by about 0.3%/0.5% × 100 = 60 to 10 W.
The reactive power delivered was decreased slightly as the local
terminal voltage was slightly higher than the nominal value,
which means that the grid had excessive reactive power.
VII. C
ONCLUSION
In this paper, the idea of operating an inverter as an SG has
been developed and proved to be feasible after establishing
a model for SGs to cover all the dynamics without any as-
sumptions to the signals. The implementation and operation of
such an inverter, including power regulation and load sharing,
have been developed and described in detail. The mathematical
model developed here can be used to investigate the stability of
power systems dominated by parallel-operated inverters in dis-
tributed generation. Both simulation and experimental results
are provided.
A
CKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank Mr. T. Hornik for his help in
preparing the experiments.
REFERENCES
[1] J. M. Carrasco, L. G. Franquelo, J. T. Bialasiewicz, E. Galvan,
R. C. Portillo-Guisado, M. A. M. Prats, J. I. Leon, and
N. Moreno-Alfonso, “Power-electronic systems for the grid integration of
renewable energy sources: A survey,”IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron., vol. 53,
no. 4, pp. 1002–1016, Aug. 2006.

=== PDF PAGE 9 ===
ZHONG AND WEISS: SYNCHRONVERTERS: INVERTERS THAT MIMIC SYNCHRONOUS GENERATORS 1267
[2] S. Busquets-Monge, J. Rocabert, P. Rodriguez, S. Alepuz, and
J. Bordonau, “Multilevel diode-clamped converter for photovoltaic
generators with independent voltage control of each solar array,” IEEE
Trans. Ind. Electron., vol. 55, no. 7, pp. 2713–2723, Jul. 2008.
[3] J. Ekanayake, L. Holdsworth, and N. Jenkins, “Control of DFIG wind
turbines,” Power Eng., vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 28–32, Feb. 2003.
[4] M. Prodanovic and T. C. Green, “Control and ﬁlter design of three-phase
inverters for high power quality grid connection,” IEEE Trans. Power
Electron., vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 373–380, Jan. 2003.
[5] C. K. Sao and P. W. Lehn, “Autonomous load sharing of voltage source
converters,” IEEE Trans. Power Del. , vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 1009–1016,
Apr. 2005.
[6] K. De Brabandere, B. Bolsens, J. Van den Keybus, A. Woyte, J. Driesen,
and R. Belmans, “A voltage and frequency droop control method for
parallel inverters,” IEEE Trans. Power Electron., vol. 22, no. 4, pp. 1107–
1115, Jul. 2007.
[7] T. Loix, K. De Brabandere, J. Driesen, and R. Belmans, “A three-phase
voltage and frequency droop control scheme for parallel inverters,” in
Proc. 33rd IECON, 2007, pp. 1662–1667.
[8] P. Piagi and R. H. Lasseter, “Autonomous control of microgrids,” in
Proc. IEEE Power Eng. Soc. Gen. Meet. , 2006. [Online]. Available:
http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=1708993
[9] M. Prodanovic and T. C. Green, “High-quality power generation through
distributed control of a power park microgrid,”IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron.,
vol. 53, no. 5, pp. 1471–1482, Oct. 2006.
[10] J. M. Guerrero, J. C. Vasquez, J. Matas, M. Castilla, and L. G. de Vicuna,
“Control strategy for ﬂexible microgrid based on parallel line-interactive
UPS systems,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron. , vol. 56, no. 3, pp. 726–736,
Mar. 2009.
[11] J. C. Vasquez, J. M. Guerrero, A. Luna, P. Rodriguez, and R. Teodorescu,
“Adaptive droop control applied to voltage-source inverters operating in
grid-connected and islanded modes,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron., vol. 56,
no. 10, pp. 4088–4096, Oct. 2009.
[12] “Proposed terms and deﬁnitions for ﬂexible AC transmission system
(FACTS),” IEEE Trans. Power Del. , vol. 12, no. 4, pp. 1848–1853,
Oct. 1997.
[13] H.-P. Beck and R. Hesse, “Virtual synchronous machine,” inProc. 9th Int.
Conf. EPQU, 2007, pp. 1–6.
[14] Q.-C. Zhong and G. Weiss, “Static synchronous generators for distributed
generation and renewable energy,” inProc. IEEE PES PSCE, Washington,
DC, Mar. 2009, pp. 1–6.
[15] J. Driesen and K. Visscher, “Virtual synchronous generators,” in Proc.
IEEE Power Energy Soc. Gen. Meeting–Conversion and Delivery of
Electrical Energy in the 21st Century , Jul. 2008, pp. 1–3.
[16] K. Visscher and S. W. H. De Haan, “Virtual synchronous machines
(VSG’s) for frequency stabilisation in future grids with a signiﬁcant share
of decentralized generation,” in Proc. IET-CIRED Semin. Smart-Grids
Distrib., Jun. 2008, pp. 1–4.
[17] J. J. Grainger and W. D. Stevenson, Power System Analysis.N e w Y o r k :
McGraw-Hill, 1994.
[18] A. E. Fitzgerald, C. Kingsley, and S. D. Umans, Electric Machinery .
New York: McGraw-Hill, 2003.
[19] J. H. Walker, Large Synchronous Machines: Design, Manufacture and
Operation. Oxford, U.K.: Oxford Univ. Press, 1981.
[20] P. Kundur, Power System Stability and Control . New York: McGraw-
Hill, 1994.
[21] D. P. Kothari and I. J. Nagrath,Electric Machines, 3rd. New Delhi, India:
McGraw-Hill, 2004.
[22] A. J. Ellison, Electromechanical Energy Conversion . London, U.K.:
George G. Harrap Co. Ltd., 1965.
[23] Q.-C. Zhong, J. Liang, G. Weiss, C. M. Feng, and T. C. Green, “ H
∞
control of the neutral point in 4-wire 3-phase DC-AC converters,” IEEE
Trans. Ind. Electron., vol. 53, no. 5, pp. 1594–1602, Oct. 2006.
[24] Q.-C. Zhong, L. Hobson, and M. G. Jayne, “Classical control of the
neutral point in 4-wire 3-phase DC-AC converters,”J. Elect. Power Qual.
Utilisation, vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 111–119, 2005.
Qing-Chang Zhong (M’04–SM’04) received the
Diploma degree in electrical engineering from
Hunan Institute of Engineering, Xiangtan, China, in
1990, the M.Sc. degree in electrical engineering from
Hunan University, Changsha, China, in 1997, the
Ph.D. degree in control theory and engineering from
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China,
in 1999, and the Ph.D. degree in control and power
engineering (awarded the Best Doctoral Thesis Prize)
from Imperial College London, London, U.K., in
2004, respectively.
He was with the Technion—Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel;
Imperial College London, London, U.K.; and the University of Glamorgan,
Treforest, U.K.; and the University of Liverpool, Liverpool, U.K. He is cur-
rently with Loughborough University, Leicestershire, U.K. He is the author
or coauthor of three research monographs: Robust Control of Time-Delay
Systems (Springer-Verlag 2006), Control of Integral Processes with Dead Time
(Springer-Verlag 2010), Control of Power Inverters for Distributed Generation
and Renewable Energy (Wiley-IEEE Press, scheduled to appear in 2011). His
current research focuses on robust and H-inﬁnity control, time-delay systems,
process control, power electronics, electric drives and electric vehicles, distrib-
uted generation, and renewable energy.
Dr. Zhong is a Fellow of the Institution of Engineering and Technology
(Institution of Electrical Engineers) and a Senior Research Fellow of the Royal
Academy of Engineering/Leverhulme Trust, U.K. (2009–2010).
George Weiss received the B.S. degree in control
engineering from the Polytechnic Institute of
Bucharest, Bucharest, Romania, in 1981, and
the Ph.D. degree in applied mathematics from
Weizmann Institute, Rehovot, Israel, in 1989.
He was with Brown University, Providence, RI;
Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University,
Blacksburg; Weizmann Institute, Ben-Gurion Uni-
versity, Beer Sheva, Israel; the University of Exeter,
Exeter, U.K.; and Imperial College London, London,
U.K. Currently, he is with Tel Aviv University,
Ramat Aviv, Israel. He is a coauthor (with M. Tucsnak) of the bookObservation
and Control for Operator Semigroups(Birkhäuser, 2009). His research interests
are distributed parameter systems, operator semigroups, control applied in
power electronics, repetitive control, and periodic (in particular, sampled-data)
linear systems.