=== PDF PAGE 1 ===
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON POWER SYSTEMS, VOL. 21, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2006 433
Wind Turbines Emulating Inertia and Supporting Primary Frequency Control
Johan Morren, Student Member, IEEE, Sjoerd W. H. de Haan, Member, IEEE, Wil L. Kling, Member, IEEE, and
J. A. Ferreira, Fellow, IEEE
Abstract—The increasing penetration of variable-speed wind
turbines in the electricity grid will result in a reduction of the
number of connected conventional power plants. This will require
changes in the way the grid frequency is controlled. In this letter,
a method is proposed to let variable-speed wind turbines emulate
inertia and support primary frequency control. The required
power is obtained from the kinetic energy stored in the rotating
mass of the turbine blades.
Index Terms—Frequency control, stability, wind power genera-
tion.
I. I NTRODUCTION
T
HE NUMBER of wind turbines connected to the grid is
steadily increasing, and some countries, such as Denmark,
have high penetration levels of wind turbines already.
Nowadays,thegridfrequencyiscontrolledbytheconventional
power plants. The goal of the control is to keep the frequency
within speciﬁed limits. To obtain this, conventional generators
are equipped with so-called primary and secondary control. Fur-
ther, the inertia in the grid limits the rate of frequency change in
case of an unbalance between generated and consumed power.
Contribution of wind farms to primary frequency control is
nowadays required by several grid operators [1] but will be dif-
ﬁcult to realize as the energy source (wind) is not directly con-
trollable. So far, only one method has been proposed to meet this
requirement, where the wind turbines do not supply the max-
imum available power in normal situation, so that a margin re-
mains for power control [2].
Similar to conventional generators, wind turbines have a sig-
niﬁcant amount of kinetic energy stored in the rotating mass of
their blades. In case of variable-speed wind turbines, this en-
ergy will not contribute to the inertia of the grid as the rota-
tional speed is decoupled from the grid frequency by a power
electronic converter. In this letter, additional control is proposed
that makes the “hidden inertia” available to the grid. In this way,
wind turbines can 1) emulate inertia and 2) support the primary
frequency control for some time.
II. W
IND TURBINE INERTIA
The proposed methods use the kinetic energy stored in the
rotating mass of the wind turbine, which is given by
(1)
Manuscript received June 20, 2005; revised August 24, 2005. This work
was funded in part by SenterNovem within the Program IOP-EMVT. Paper no.
PESL-00056-2005.
J. Morren, S. W. H. de Haan, and J. A. Ferreira are with the Electrical Power
Processing Unit, Delft University of Technology, 2628CD Delft, The Nether-
lands (e-mail: J.Morren@ewi.tudelft.nl).
W. L. Kling is with the Electrical Power Systems Group, Delft University of
Technology, 2628CD Delft, The Netherlands.
Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/TPWRS.2005.861956
Fig. 1. Proposed controller. Upper branch: wind rotor control. Middle branch:
inertia emulation. Lower branch: frequency control support.
with
 the inertia of the wind rotor and
 its rotational speed.
In electrical power engineering, often the so-called inertia con-
stant
is used
(2)
where
 is the nominal apparent power. The inertia constant has
the dimension time and gives an indication of the time duration
that the generator can provide nominal power by only using its
kinetic energy. Typical inertia constants for the generators of
the large power plants are in the range of 2–9 s [3]. Typical
values for wind turbines have roughly the same value: about 2–6
s [4]. This implies that introduction of wind turbines in the grid
does not necessarily reduce the amount of kinetic energy that is
available. Additional control is proposed to emulate inertia and
to support primary frequency control.
III. P
ROPOSED CONTROLLER
Normally, the controllers of variable-speed wind turbines try
to keep the turbine at its optimal speed in order to produce max-
imum power. The controller gives a torque set point that is based
on measured speed and power (see Fig. 1).
The torque set point is an input for the converter control that
realizes the torque by controlling the generator currents. An ad-
ditional controller is proposed that adapts the torque set point as
a function of the deviation of the grid frequency
and of the
rate of the change of the grid frequency
 (see Fig. 1). The
emulated inertia is proportional to the controller constant
 ,
and the support to primary frequency control is proportional to
, where this latter loop is activated when the grid frequency
exceeds certain limits.
IV . SIMULATION SET-UP
Simulations have been done only to show the ability of wind
turbines to support primary frequency control. In this example,
no extra inertia is emulated.
A model of a small grid has been used. It consists of two
synchronous generators (20 and 80 MW), an aggregated
load (120 MW), and six variable-speed DFIG wind turbines
(2.75 MW each), as described in [5]. Only one of the turbines
is simulated; its output current is multiplied by six.
0885-8950/$20.00 © 2006 IEEE

=== PDF PAGE 2 ===
434 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON POWER SYSTEMS, VOL. 21, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2006
Fig. 2. Response to disconnection of synchronous generator with controller
ON (solid) and controller OFF (dashed). (a) Grid frequency. (b) Wind turbine
power. (c) Wind turbine rotational speed.
An event is simulated in which the synchronous generator of
20 MW is suddenly disconnected at
 . This results in
a change in frequency. The rate of frequency change depends,
amongst others, on the system inertia.
In Fig. 2, simulations are shown with controller OFF (dashed
lines) and controller ON (solid line). Fig. 2(a) shows that the
initial response is the same for both cases. When the frequency
limit of 49.9 Hz is exceeded, the f-support controller is activated,
resulting in a slightly higher frequency than can be realized with
controller OFF.
Fig. 2(b) shows the output power of the wind turbine. It in-
creases at the moment that the frequency exceeds its limit and
the controller is activated. Because kinetic energy from the wind
turbine is used to supply more power to the grid, the rotational
speed of the turbine is decreasing [see Fig. 2(c)]. The turbine
resumes normal operation at
. At this moment, the
power drops to a value that is much lower than its initial value,
because the turbine is not at its optimal speed anymore. In ad-
dition, power is needed to speed the turbine up to its optimal
operation speed, which implies that only a part of the available
aerodynamic power is transmitted to the grid. The drop in power
also explains why the frequency curves in Fig. 2(a) are different
from each other after
 .
V. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
Fig. 2(a) shows that the wind turbine operated at only 0.35
p.u. The additional power that was generated for support was
roughly 0.1 p.u. The ability of the wind turbine to support the
primary frequency control will be better at higher power, be-
cause the kinetic energy stored in the blades will increase.
During the support, the rotational speed of the wind turbine is
decreasing. As a result, the power will drop considerable when
the frequency control support is ended, as shown in Fig. 2(b).
This drop in power will be undesirable mostly, especially when
complete wind farms show this behavior. In larger wind farms,
the effect can be mitigated partially by ending the frequency
control support of the turbines at different times. Also a gradual
change to normal operation, instead of the abrupt change that is
applied in the example, will improve the behavior.
The main conclusion that can be drawn from the results in this
letter is that variable-speed wind turbines are able to support
primary frequency control and to emulate inertia by applying
additional control loops. For that purpose, the kinetic energy
stored in the “hidden inertia” of the turbine blades is used.
R
EFERENCES
[1] J. Matevosyan, T. Ackermann, and S. Bolik, “Technical regulations for
the interconnection of wind farms to the power systems,” in Wind Power
in Power Systems , T. Ackermann, Ed. Chicester, U.K.: John Wiley,
2005, pp. 115–142.
[2] P. Soerensen, A. D. Hansen, K. Thomsen, H. Madsen, H. A. Nielsen,
N. K. Poulsen, F. Iov, F. Blaabjerg, and M. H. Donovan, “Wind farm
controllers with grid support, ” in Proc. 5th Int. Workshop Large-Scale
Integration Wind Power Transmission Networks Offshore Wind Farms,
Glasgow, U.K., Apr. 7–8, 2005.
[3] J. J. Grainger and W. D. Stevenson,Power System Analysis. New York:
McGraw-Hill, 1994.
[4] H. Knudsen and J. N. Nielsen, “Introduction to the modeling of wind tur-
bines,” in Wind Power in Power Systems, T. Ackermann, Ed. Chicester,
U.K.: Wiley, 2005, pp. 525–585.
[5] J. T. G. Pierik, J. Morren, E. Wiggelinkhuizen, S. W. H. de Haan, T.
G. van Engelen, and J. Bozelie, “Electrical and control aspects of off-
shore wind turbines II (Erao-2), ”, Tech. Rep. ECN-C- -04-050, vol. 1,
Dynamic models of wind farms, Jun. 2004.